# Observer Design Pattern

There's one part of Node.js that we've been taken for granted. It's the idea of Node.js being event driven. We've discussed in detail the **event loop** which is where our events get generated asynchronously in the background.

But what does it means for us as Node.js developers? How do we react to all of these events from the event loop?
The most universal way, that we'll see in every programming language of dealing with events is what is what's called the **observer design pattern**. We'll talk about this **observer design pattern** throughout.

**Design patterns** are proven approaches to solving problem that appear again and again in all king of programs and applications. They allow us developers to avoid re-inventing the wheel. To avoid coming with patterns of our own from scratch every time we encounter a new problem.

Let's take a look specifically at the **observer pattern** which is one of the approaches that we apply when we have something like say a celebrity; say for instance a mysterious racing driver. Someone famous who a bunch of people, their fans, are interested in getting updates about. These fans ares **observers**, and the celebrity is the **subject** of being observed.

So our observers *subscribe* to **events** from the celebrity that they are interested in; *to get notified* when an **event** relevant to the subject occurs. Maybe our mysterious racing driver wins a big event, a big race. This event comes from the subject. Who then notified all of the observers. As long as the observer is subscribed to that subject, it gets all the updates from it. Now each observer can react to that event in whichever way it needs. Whatever the observer and the subject are specifically doing, we tend to use this pattern when the subjects that we're observing are celebrity, doesn't just trigger one event, but instead create a series of events, that can be listen by multiple observers, and can occur spontaneously more than once. So our race car driver can win a race on hopefully multiple occasions. Or he might start driven a new car. Whatever the event, there is many to one relationship between **observers** and **subject**. All that means is that; just one **subject** can have many **observers**. So what is this useful for. Celebrities can be modeled using this pattern, but a button might be represented this way as well. With button hover or click events for example. Database can be represented this way with data being created, updated and deleted on different collections of data. So each of those will correspond to a different event.

And we'll see later in this course, even different messages being sent over a chat client can be represented  using the **observer pattern**. It is really so useful and it is in fact the basis for popular front-end frameworks, like **react** and **angular**, and we'll definitely be using it in this course. Alright now, let's take this concept and explore how we might use the **observer pattern** specifically in NodeJS